CP650 - Lec 11 1
Dr. Usama Mir 
umir@wlu.ca
Week 9
Lecture11 (Chap 9)  
Qualitative Data Analysis

Summary of Data Gathering Types
CP650 - Lec 11 2


Quantitative vs. Qualitative
Quantitative data is in the form of numbers, or data that can easily be translated into 
numbers. Examples are the number of years’ experience the interviewees have, the 
number of projects a department handles at a time, or the number of minutes it takes 
to perform a task. 
CP650 - Lec 11 3
Qualitative data is in the form of words and images, and it includes descriptions, 
quotes from interviewees, vignettes of activity, and photos. It is possible to express 
qualitative data in numerical form, but it is not always meaningful to do so 

Quantitative Data: Example (1)
CP650 - Lec 11 4


Quantitative Data: Example (2)
CP650 - Lec 11 5


Quantitative Data: Example (3)
CP650 - Lec 11 6
R programming in one hour - a crash 
course for beginners - YouTube

Quantitative Data: Example (4)
CP650 - Lec 11 7


Systematic Qualitative Data Analysis(1)
CP650 - Lec 11 8
• Qualitativedataincludesattitudinaldata(thoughts,beliefs, 
needs)andbehavioraldata(observationsof behavior)
• Analyzing data can be overwhelming due to large quantity 
of Information
• It is easy to be biased by personal views and 
overlook important insights
• Qualitative analysis can be systematic and replicable
• Different methods answer different questions

SystematicQualitativeDataAnalysis (2)
Analyzing Video Material
A good way to start a video analysis is to watch what has been recorded all the way through while writing a high-
level narrative of what happens, noting where in the video there are any potentially interesting events. How to 
decide which is an interesting event will depend on what is being observed. For example, in a study of the 
interruptions that occur in an open plan office, an event might be each time that a person takes a break from an 
ongoing activity, for instance, when a phone rings, someone walks into their cubicle, or email arrives. If it is a 
study of how pairs of students use an online collaborative learning tool, then activities such as turn-taking, 
speaking over one another, any exchanges in the chat, and periods when one or the other is distracted would be 
appropriate to record.
Chronological and video times can be used to index events. These may not be the same, since recordings can run 
at different speeds from real time and video can be edited. Video can be augmented with captured screens or 
logged data of people's interactions with a product, and transcription. There are various logging and screen 
capture tools available for this purpose, which enable interactions to be played back as a movie, showing screen 
objects being opened, moved, selected, and so on. These can then be played in parallel with the video to provide 
different perspectives on the talk, physical interactions, and the system's responses that occur. Having a 
combination of data streams can enable more detailed and fine-grained patterns of behavior to be interpreted 
(Heath et al., 2010).
Coding data using a coding scheme is integral to the analytic process. Anne Nassauer and Nicolas Legewie (2022) 
emphasize reliability as a guiding principle in analysis, meaning that the study is consistent in its procedure so 
that others can assess its research steps. They also emphasize the importance of considering alternative 
interpretations and provide some useful practical tips on video analysis, including how to construct clear and 
transparent concepts that enable reflection and critique, how to construct and apply a coding scheme, and how 
to overcome a range of challenges. For example, they highlight that coding decisions can be ambiguous, 
subjective, or incorrect. Even the best coding schemes can include codes that just don't work unambiguously all 
of the time. Subjectivity leads to different coding decisions by different researchers, and coding decisions may be 
incorrect simply because a mistake was made. To help overcome these challenges, they suggest making coding a 
team effort and drawing in expert knowledge of the study area. 9

SystematicQualitativeDataAnalysis: Data Capture and Transcription
CP650 - Lec 11 10
Proper data capture is crucial for successful analysis.
This includes making detailed notes, transcribing and 
editing interviews, labeling media files, and breaking up 
large data sets into smaller, more manageable pieces.
Filtering data is necessary to focus on the most relevant and 
important information within the constraints of a research 
project.
Coding data 
▪ Helps organize and make sense of it by identifying patterns
and themes.
▪ Ongoing data processing and debriefing with team members can help 
ensure accuracy and identify emerging insights.

Thematic Analysis(TA): An Overview
CP650 - Lec 11 11
• Thematic analysis is a method of organizing and analyzing
qualitative data
• It involves finding themes by tagging observations and 
quotations with appropriate codes
• A theme is a description of a belief, practice, need, or other
phenomenon discovered from the data
• Themes emerge when related findings appear multiple times 
across participants or data sources

TA: Challenges of Analyzing Qualitative Data
CP650 - Lec 11 12
• Large quantity of data can be time-consuming to read 
and analyze
• Rich data with many details can lead to superficial 
or descriptive analysis
• Contradicting data can result in findings that are not
definitive
• Without clear goals, analysis can lack focus and 
be misdirected
• Thematic analysis helps to address these challenges by 
providing a systematic process for organizing and 
analyzing data.

TA: Example showing diverse discussions related to 
addiction and recovery occurring on the subreddits (1)
CP650 - Lec 11 13


CP650 - Lec 11 14
TA: Example showing diverse discussions related to 
addiction and recovery occurring on the subreddits (2)
Paraphrased Example Quote


T A  :  Tools and Methods
CP650 - Lec 11 15
• Thematic analysis can be done in various ways based on data,
context, and researcher's personal style
• 3 common methods include: software, journaling, and affinity 
diagramming techniques

TA Using Software
CP650 - Lec 11 16
• Data-analysis software can be used to code and analyze large
amounts of qualitative data
• Examples of data-analysis software include Dovetail, 
EnjoyHQ, Delve, Aurelius, NVivo, Dedoose, and MAXQDA
• Benefits of using software include thorough analysis, ability to
collaborate, and accessibility of raw data and results
• Drawbacks include time-consuming analysis, expense of 
subscriptions or licenses, and need for software learning

TA UsingSoftware: Example (1)
CP650 - Lec 11 17
https://www.xfive.co/blog/dovetail-thematic-analysis-clutch-reviews/


TA UsingSoftware: Example (2)
CP650 - Lec 11 18
https://www.xfive.co/blog/dovetail-thematic-analysis-clutch-reviews/

TA through Journaling
CP650 - Lec 11 19
• Journaling involves manually annotating and highlighting data,
followed by writing down thoughts and ideas
• This method encourages reflection and results in a record of 
how themes were arrived at
• Benefits include being cheap and flexible, but it can be
difficult to do collaboratively

TA: Affinity Diagramming Techniques
CP650 - Lec 11 20
• Affinity diagramming involves highlighting, cutting out, and 
reassembling data into meaningful groups until themes 
emerge
• Benefits include being able to be done collaboratively, quick 
theme identification, being cheap and flexible, and being visual 
and iterative
• Drawbacks include not being as thorough as other methods 
and being difficult to do with very varied or large amounts of 
data

AffinityDiagramming: Example (1)
CP650 - Lec 11 21
https://www.nngroup.com/articles/affinity-diagram/

AffinityDiagramming: Example (2)
CP650 - Lec 11 22


TA: Steps to Conduct
CP650 - Lec 11 23
• Thematic analysis involves 5 phases: gathering data, reading all 
data, coding text, taking a break, and evaluating themes
• Phase 1: Gather all data, including transcripts, field notes, and 
diary study entries
• Phase 2: Read all data from beginning to end, and involve 
team in a workshop to engage with text and discuss findings
• Phase 3: Code text based on content, using descriptive codes 
and potentially interpretive codes
• Phase 4:Take a break and come back to the analysis later
• Phase 5: Evaluate themes for good fit, potentially involving 
team in review and discussion of themes

TA Phase 1: Gather Data
• Start with raw data, such as transcripts, field notes, and diary
study entries
• Transcribe audio recordings for analysis instead of relying 
on memory or notes
Source: NNGroup
CP650 - Lec 11 24

TA Phase 2: Read All Data from Beginning to End
CP650 - Lec 11 25
• Familiarize yourself with the data before beginning analysis
• Involve team in workshop to engage with text and 
discuss findings
• Print and display research questions for reference
• Have each team member read and highlight important bits 
in transcripts or entries
• Discuss as a group what was noticed or found surprising

Phase 3: Code Text Based on Content
• Review each segment of text and assign a descriptive code
that describes the data
• Add interpretive codes if appropriate
• Code can be created before or after grouping data
Source: NNGroup
CP650 - Lec 11 26


TA: Introduction to Codes and Coding
CP650 - Lec 11 27
• Definition: A code is a label for a segment of text that
describes its content
• Good analogy: A code is like a keyword that describes an 
article or a hashtag that describes a tweet

TA: Introductionto Codes andCoding
• Coding: refers to the process of labeling text with codes
• Allows for easy comparison and analysis of data to uncover 
themes
• Often, researchers will also have a description and examples
of each code to ensure consistency in coding
Source: NNGroup
CP650 - Lec 11 28

TA: Descriptive and Interpretive Codes
CP650 - Lec 11 29
• Descriptive:They describe what the data is about
• Interpretive:
They are an analytical reading of the data, adding
the researcher’s interpretive lens to it.

TA: Interview 1(1)
CP650 - Lec 11 30
• Interviewer: Hello, can you please introduce yourself?
• Participant 1 (P1): Hi, I'm Sarah.
• Interviewer: Great, thank you for participating in this study. 
Can you tell us how often do you use Netflix?
• P1: I use Netflix almost every day.

TA: Interview 1(2)
CP650 - Lec 11 31
• Interviewer: Hello, can you please introduce yourself?
• Participant 1 (P1): Hi, I'm Sarah.
• Interviewer: Great, thank you for participating in this study. 
Can you tell us how often do you use Netflix?
• P1: I use Netflix almostevery day. [P1_DC_ daily user/active
user]
• P1: Participant 1
• DC: Descriptive Code
• Frequency of Use: Participants use Netflix frequently, as seen 
in the quote "I use Netflix almost every day." (Frequency: 1)

TA: Interview1(3)
CP650 - Lec 11 32
• Interviewer: Can you describe your first experience with
Netflix?
• P1: My first experience with Netflix was really good. I had 
heard a lot of good things about it and was excited to try it 
out. I signed up for the free trial and was really impressed 
with the selection of shows and movies available. I was 
hooked from the start.

TA: Interview1(4)
• Interviewer: Can you describe your first experience with
Netflix?
CP650 - Lec 11 33
My first experience with Netflix was really good.• P1: I had
heard a lot of good things about it and was excited to try it
[P1_DC_positive word of mouth]out . I signed up for the
[P1_DC_free trial]free trial and was really impressed with
the selection of shows and movies available trial[P1_DC_  a
lot of content].I was hooked from the start.
•
•
[P1_IC_positive first experience]
[P1_IC_addictive first experience]
• IC: Interpretive Code

TA: Interview1(5)
Theme Interpretive Code Descriptive Code
Theme I: Positive First Experience: 
Participants had a positive first 
experience with Netflix, as seen in 
the quote/quotes "My first 
experience with Netflix was really 
good." (Frequency: 1)
[P1_IC_positive first experience] 
“My first experience with Netflix 
was really good.“
[P1_DC_positive word of mouth]
[P1_IC_addictive first experience]
“I was hooked from the start.”
[P1_DC_free trial]
[P1_DC_ a lot of content]
CP650 - Lec 11 34
• Frequency Count:The number of times an observation occurs (frequency) for a
data item (variable) can be shown for both quantitative and qualitative data.
• For qualitative data this directly correlates with quotes, citations, references, 
snippets, etc.

TA: Interview1(6)
Theme Interpretive Code Descriptive Code
Theme I: Positive First Experience: 
Participants had a positive first 
experience with Netflix, as seen in 
the quote "My first experience 
with Netflix was really good." 
(Frequency: 1)
[P1_IC_positive first experience] 
“My first experience with Netflix 
was really good.“
[P1_DC_positive word of mouth]
[P1_IC_addictive first experience]
“I was hooked from the start.”
[P1_DC_free trial]
[P1_DC_ a lot of content]
CP650 - Lec 11 35

TA: Interview1(7)
CP650 - Lec 11 36
• Themes: Content Selection: Participants were impressed 
with the selection of shows and movies available on Netflix, 
as seen in the quote "I was really impressed with the 
selection of shows and movies available." (Frequency: 1)
• Descriptive Code: NewContent
• Interpretive Code: 'Always something new to watch'

TA Process: Example (1)
CP650 - Lec 11 37
Source:  https://www.userinterviews.com/ux-research-field-guide-chapter/research-analysis

TA Process: Example (2)
CP650 - Lec 11 38
Source:  https://www.userinterviews.com/ux-research-field-guide-chapter/research-analysis


TA Process: Example (3)
Source:  https://www.userinterviews.com/ux-research-field-guide-chapter/research-analysis
CP650 - Lec 11 39

TA: Using Mind Maps (1) 
Source:  https://www.toptal.com/designers/ux-research/thematic-analysis-for-ux
CP650 - Lec 11 40

TA: UsingMind Maps (2)
Source: https://www.evalacademy.com/articles/interpreting-themes-from-qualitative-data-thematic-analysis
CP650 - Lec 11 41

TA: Using Spreadsheet
Source: https://www.toptal.com/designers/ux-research/thematic-analysis-for-ux
CP650 - Lec 11 42

TA: Defining Themes After the Coding Process
Source: https://www.toptal.com/designers/ux-research/thematic-analysis-for-ux
CP650 - Lec 11 43

TA: Sample Criteria for Identifying Usability Problems (UPs) 
CP650 - Lec 11 44
